---
title: Technical Communities
description: A guide on Understanding technical communities
---

## How technology helps communities?
Imagine everyone in your neighborhood working together to fix problems like dirty parks or traffic jams. Civic tech helps them share ideas and take action, all with just a phone or computer. In an age where technology is omnipresent, its potential to revolutionize communities for the better cannot be overstated. From enhancing accessibility to healthcare and education to fostering sustainability and connectivity, technological innovations have the power to uplift societies worldwide. For any successful economy, technology becomes a catalyst for social change. The role of technology in community development is to give power and a voice to people within the larger ecosystem. It enables citizens to create a better future for themselves. Simple solutions, such as providing information to the community through Internet-enabled devices, highlight the role technology plays in accelerating development. Replicating these ideas with due involvement of community members will multiply the reach. This, coupled with developmental interventions, also improves the quality of their life. Therefore, it is imperative that philanthropic organizations, government and civic bodies embed technology as a critical intervention into their developmental programmes.

It helps in the following ways:
- Accessibility. Technology allows everyone in the world to participate. You don’t have to be in the same room. You don’t have to wait for a pause in the discussion to participate. You don’t have to be extroverted to jump in. You can join in the specific discussions you like. You can ask the difficult questions you couldn’t ask in person.
- Longevity. Community activities are (usually) stored indefinitely. They create a body of knowledge. They create a sum of previous stories and shared experiences. This is powerful for communities filled with tacit knowledge easily lost when members depart. You can use this to rapidly improve the skills/abilities of members.
- Nudges. Technology can automatically remind people to participate in communities. We can use technology to establish reminders, notifications, and other nudges to get people into the regular habit of participating in their community. From the moment members join, you can nudge members to participate in the right discussions in the right way via copy and tech tweaks.
- Influence. Technology allows you to have clear influence over the community. You can add/remove discussions, highlight members and material you want people to pay attention to, and establish the rules for participation more easily than you could with an offline community. You can create an easy narrative for the community via content.

## Technology can play a role in innovative problem-solving
Technology alone is not a panacea and will not — on its own — empower hard-hit communities. It has to be implemented alongside strategies that focus on connecting people and building community capacity. It has to serve a need,” says Shauna Brail, an associate professor at the Institute for Management and Innovation at University of Toronto Mississauga. For example, she points to on-demand transit initiatives, which can help improve transport equity for underserved neighbourhoods by making it easier and faster for lower-income residents to get around their city. And she sees potential in apps that make it easier for small business owners to offer online ordering and delivery, especially during the pandemic.

In Austin, Texas, the public housing authority offers a program called [Smart Work, Learn, Play](https://nextcenturycities.org/3415/), which aims to connect underserved communities with various opportunities by increasing their ability to use online public services, particularly transportation. Austin built on a digital inclusion program that seeks to put an internet connection, digital literacy training and computers in every housing authority home. The new program involves a housing authority nonprofit subsidiary, Austin Pathways, which has recruited “mobility ambassadors” to encourage low-income residents to be more engaged citizens.

The city of Raleigh, N.C., is also utilizing technology to further civic engagement through [InVision Raleigh](https://nextcenturycities.org/3415/), a web-based 3D tool allowing citizens to visualize and interact with proposed changes in the city. Using a solution from [Esri](https://www.esri.com/en-us/home), a geospatial company, the city provides government staff and the public with location-based data that can be viewed online or downloaded as detailed custom maps, including buildings, parks and zoning. 

We are already seeing examples of what can be achieved and the difference it can make with platforms like [SeeClickFix](https://seeclickfix.com/) in the US that enables the processing of citizen complaints and reports through to city and state-level authorities, “democracy at the click of a mouse” a platform that has created linkages between South Africa’s first democratically-elected provincial legislators and their national counterparts, “Truth-O-Meter” a Serbian platform that helps the public hold politicians accountable, [“Wetaase”](https://wetaase.org/) a Ugandan web and mobile platform serving high-risk individuals, victims and survivors of human trafficking, “Balancing Act” a public-budget simulation that helps local residents understand how their tax dollars are being spent and many more which are yet to come up. All these systems are the key to having citizens shape rather than just accepting the services their governments offer.

Classic examples are platforms which allow direct interaction with the government. These can come in various shapes and sizes. For example, they may be simple petition websites, such as the UK government’s [Petition.Parliament.uk](https://petition.parliament.uk/) – which guarantees a government response if a certain petition threshold is reached, or information enquiry websites like Germany’s [Frag den Staat (Ask the State)](https://fragdenstaat.de/). Others may be operated by volunteers outside of the government, who ensure transparency of government operations. Another German example is [Offener Haushalt](https://offenerhaushalt.de/) (Open Budget). Here, citizens can view the budget of the federal, state and local governments with data compiled by volunteers. Even if the definitions differ slightly in detail, the core of Civ Tech is always about empowering citizens through the use of technology in some form.

The range of civic tech applications is wide, as the [Civic Tech Field Guide](https://civictech.guide/), a global collection of civic tech tools and projects, shows. Even if most projects are about bringing more transparency into political decisions and processes, civic tech can also increasingly be found in environmental and climate protection. For example, [city dwellers](https://en.reset.org/how-sensors-on-walls-and-balconies-can-help-citizens-clean-up-air-pollution/) can install sensors on their balconies to reveal how much pollutants are in the air they breath. All this information can then be combined together to create maps of air quality in the city. Other apps may allow citizens to give feedback regarding the [condition of cycle paths](https://en.reset.org/bike-citizens-our-app-we-navigate-cyclists-and-show-routes-bicycle-friendly-cities-04152020/), or draw attention to companies using unnecessary plastic packaging. In the field of research, volunteer [Citizen Scientists](https://en.reset.org/citizen-science-everyday-people-supporting-scientific-research-07062021/) can record [animal populations via satellite images](https://en.reset.org/zooniverse-a-million-volunteers-are-helping-to-spot-animals-transcribe-records-and-weather-watch-in-the-name-of-science/) or [identify methane emissions or illegal deforestation](https://en.reset.org/). This can all result in an important database for politics and civil society to help spur demand for effective measures.

The above-mentioned examples also show two other characteristics of civic tech. Firstly, they are usually developed by volunteers, designers and other data enthusiasts. And secondly, the applications are developed on the basis of open administrative data such as financial and environmental data, data on educational institutions and statistical data. In addition, many of the tools are freely available to the public in the sense of the open source approach, so that they can not only be used freely, but also permanently further developed and adapted. What these efforts have in common is the objective to use civic technology, or CivTech, to improve the lives of citizens and provide them with the means to get involved in their local communities. CivTech can be defined as “the development and/or use of technology that enables the engagement or increased public participation in improving government infrastructure and enhancing citizen communications or opportunities.” CivTech is being used in myriad ways throughout the world.

## Examples of Civic Tech Around Us
The concept of civic engagement, once defined by traditional activities such as voting and attending town hall meetings, has dramatically evolved in response to social, political, and technological shifts. From the emergence of civic tech to the rise of social media activism, the scope of civic participation has broadened. 

- Bike Citizens: A Navigation App and a Tool to Foster More Cycling in Cities. Bike Citizens is a positive double-whammy for more cycling-friendly sustainable cities - it's a navigation app that shows cyclists the best routes around town, while simultaneously collecting data on bicycle movement and behaviour for more bike-friendly cities.

- Apps Against Plastic Waste: The Litterati app also uses similar mechanisms. The app, which is one of the most widely used – geographically speaking – in the world, originated in the USA and allows users to photograph, geotag and remove litter found in streets, parks and forests. In this way, the geotaggers not only collect trash, but also information about the type of trash, the producer, and the location where it was found.

- A counterpart to Litterati is a German app muell-weg.de. In just three steps, users can automatically determine the location of the garbage, simply by GPS or by reading the GPS data from a smartphone photo. The responsible municipality is then automatically determined and a pre-formulated message is created that can be sent immediately. The trick behind it: Municipalities are not allowed to ignore a waste find reported by email.

- Local Energy Revolution: Civic technology helps communities put power into their own hands - quite literally. New open source technologies can provide powerful tools to those looking to set up local renewable energy grids. Civic technology aims to provide citizens and community members with tools to maximise their impact in the range of important areas, whether that is local environmental conditions, scientific research or political engagement. Civic technology has the potential to offer a third “institutional world”, in which local, smaller cooperatives and initiatives develop their own energy which is more responsive to the local needs and concerns of the consumers.

- Village Data Analytics: Around 1 billion people worldwide live without reliable access to electricity. Of this number, the vast majority live in smaller, rural communities that are often isolated from the main energy grid. In some countries in the Global South, the number of people living without power can be as high as 75 percent. Many rural off-grid communities would benefit hugely from being hooked up to a solar power system. But which areas are most suitable for solar power installation? And which are most in need? A new earth observation software is using artificial intelligence and satellite imagery to bring power to people more accurately, efficiently and faster than before.

- BOS:311 App: Launched in 2009, the BOS:311 App (then called Citizens Connect) is a mobile app that empowers residents to help take care of their communities. Residents report non-emergency issues with the City directly from their smartphones. These get sent into the City’s work order management system, which then sends it to the right person in City Hall. The award-winning app has been replicated and modeled by many other cities throughout Massachusetts and across the country.

- FixIt:  This initiative focuses on repairing deadly potholes that pose a significant risk and contribute to accidents and traffic congestion. With the help of dedicated volunteers, they identify and prioritize potholes in high-traffic areas, taking swift action to repair them and restore safety to our roads. These potholes, often overlooked by authorities, can cause severe accidents and disrupt daily commutes, leading to unnecessary harm and inconvenience. At Fixit Road Repairing Project, believes in the power of community action to create tangible change. By working together, they ensure that roads are safe for all users and prevent needless accidents and traffic jams.

## Can Civic Technology Help You Fix Your City from Your Smartphone?
All too often, living in a city can make you feel like a passive bystander. But new civic technology is aiming to make it easier than ever to get involved and have your voice heard.The communicative ability of the digital realm means it provides unprecedented opportunities for both democratic decision making and public participation in important decisions. Civic technology, in particular, is designed to capitalize on these elements, and provide new tools and services which can allow citizens to better connect with their homes, cities and each other. This is especially relevant in relation to urban development and city living in general. Cities have long been identified as one area of future technological revolution, whereby currently unsustainable, polluted and overcrowded communities can be turned into more environmentally friendly, digital smart cities. Although in some regards, the smart city concept is still utopian dreaming, in other areas great strides have been made. E-mobility, ride sharing and navigation apps are now everyday parts of many urban denizens’ lives, resulting in smartphones becoming many people’s portal to urban interaction. By harnessing these developments and taking the concept further, civic tech can provide new suites of tools to allow citizens to influence their homes and improve sustainability conveniently and easily. Already digital services are being developed to provide access to healthcare, housing and energy, while smart technology can also play a role in waste management and security.

Civic technology can potentially create new, direct links between the people and their governments. Originally, contacting or informing your local representatives of an issue would require significant time, attention and often bureaucratic wrangling from the citizen, making it an unrealistic prospect for most. But the ability of digital applications to create toolsets to aid these kinds of interactions have the potential to fundamentally overhaul how urban dwellers react to, and improve, their surroundings.

Take for example, projects such as FixMyBerlin, a digital app designed to allow Berliners to quickly and conveniently alert responsible authorities to issues in their city. In 2020, FixMyBerlin was specifically approached by the Berlin Senate to develop tools to help facilitate the Berlin Mobility Act, which aimed to turn the German capital into a cyclist’s dream city. Through the interactive map, cyclists can flag issues, such as dangerous routes, construction work or a lack of bicycle stands on the app, which are then communicated to the relevant authorities. This allows the local government to understand which routes are being most frequently used, and which others require support and infrastructure. 

Digital tools also have the ability to connect citizens together in meaningful groups. City life can all too often feel like an individualistic place, where neighbours barely say hello, let alone know each other's names. Civic tech tools can help change that by bringing groups, many of which share the same issues, together. For example, such developments are underway in another German city, Dreden , which in 2015 introduced its ‘City of the Future’ campaign. Included in this were various civic tech initiatives designed to drive public participation and project creation. Dresden’s Future City Projects innovation, for example, called on volunteers to develop concepts for a greener and more environmentally friendly city. Over 300 locals discussed ways in which this could be achieved, resulting in eight projects spanning waste management to ride sharing and playgrounds. 

Originally, the teams worked with spreadsheets, but now the volunteers are developing a digital platform to help other groups or individuals realise projects of their own. The logistical burden of establishing and maintaining small communities can often be enough to dissuade citizens from creating or joining them, but by providing bespoke, open source tools, Future City Projects hopes to create a streamlined and fuss-free approach to civic engagement. Perhaps most importantly, the portal can be used for various city projects to gain access to funding.

